The Project Gutenberg Etext of What to do? by Leo Tolstoy/Tolstoi
#13 in our series by Leo Tolstoy

Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the laws for your country before redistributing these files!!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.

Please do not remove this.

This should be the first thing seen when anyone opens the book.
Do not change or edit it without written permission.  The words
are carefully chosen to provide users with the information they
need about what they can legally do with the texts.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These Etexts Are Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below, including for donations.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541



Title: What to do?

Author: Leo Tolstoy/Lyof N. Tolstoi

Release Date: January, 2003  [Etext #3630]
[Yes, we are about one year ahead of schedule]
[The actual date this file first posted = 06/25/01]

Edition: 10

Language: English

The Project Gutenberg Etext of What to do? by Leo Tolstoy/Tolstoi
*******This file should be named whttd10.txt or whttd10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, whttd11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, whttd10a.txt

This etext was produced by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk,
from the 1887 Tomas Y. Crowell edition.

Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our books one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to send us error messages even years after
the official publication date.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our sites at:
http://gutenberg.net
http://promo.net/pg


Those of you who want to download any Etext before announcement
can surf to them as follows, and just download by date; this is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03
or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release fifty new Etext
files per month, or 500 more Etexts in 2000 for a total of 3000+
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
should reach over 300 billion Etexts given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of June 16, 2001 contributions are only being solicited from people in:
Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Idaho, Indiana,
Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri,
Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oklahoma,
Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee,
Texas, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, and Wyoming.

We have filed in nearly all states now, and these are the ones
that have responded as of the date above.

As the requirements for other states are met,
additions to this list will be made and fund raising
will begin in the additional states.  Please feel
free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork
to legally request donations in all 50 states.  If
your state is not listed and you would like to know
if we have added it since the list you have, just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in
states where we are not yet registered, we know
of no prohibition against accepting donations
from donors in these states who approach us with
an offer to donate.


International donations are accepted,
but we don't know ANYTHING about how
to make them tax-deductible, or
even if they CAN be made deductible,
and don't have the staff to handle it
even if there are ways.

All donations should be made to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541,
and has been approved as a 501(c)(3) organization by the US Internal
Revenue Service (IRS).  Donations are tax-deductible to the maximum
extent permitted by law.  As the requirements for other states are met,
additions to this list will be made and fund raising will begin in the
additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


***


Example command-line FTP session:

ftp ftp.ibiblio.org
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99 or etext00 through etext02, etc.
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etexts,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this etext,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the etext,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.06/12/01*END*
[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was produced by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk,
from the 1887 Tomas Y. Crowell edition.





WHAT TO DO?

by Leo Tolstoy/Lyof N. Tolstoi




Translated by Isabel F. Hapgood




Contents:
    Translator's Note
    Article on the Census in Moscow ***
    Thoughts Evoked by the Census of Moscow ***
    On the Significance of Science and Art ***
    On Labor and Luxury
    To Women

*** Not included in this eText as they have been released separately
by Project Gutenberg ***




TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.



Books which are prohibited by the Russian Censor are not always
inaccessible.  An enterprising publishing-house in Geneva makes a
specialty of supplying the natural craving of man for forbidden
fruit, under which heading some of Count L. N. Tolstoi's essays
belong.  These essays circulate in Russia in manuscript; and it is
from one of these manuscripts, which fell into the hands of the
Geneva firm, that the first half of the present translation has been
made.  It is thus that the Censor's omissions have been noted, even
in cases where such omissions are in no way indicated in the twelfth
volume of Count Tolstoi's collected works, published in Moscow.  As
an interesting detail in this connection, I may mention that this
twelfth volume contains all that the censor allows of "My Religion,"
amounting to a very much abridged scrap of Chapter X. in the last-
named volume as known to the public outside of Russia.  The last half
of the present book has not been published by the Geneva house, and
omissions cannot be marked.

ISABEL F. HAPGOOD
BOSTON, Sept. 1, 1887



ON LABOR AND LUXURY.



I concluded, after having said every thing that concerned myself; but
I cannot refrain, from a desire to say something more which concerns
everybody, from verifying the deductions which I have drawn, by
comparisons.  I wish to say why it seems to me that a very large
number of our social class ought to come to the same thing to which I
have come; and also to state what will be the result if a number of
people should come to the same conclusion.

I think that many will come to the point which I have attained:
because if the people of our sphere, of our caste, will only take a
serious look at themselves, then young persons, who are in search of
personnel happiness, will stand aghast at the ever-increasing
wretchedness of their life, which is plainly leading them to
destruction; conscientious people will be shocked at the cruelty and
the illegality of their life; and timid people will be terrified by
the danger of their mode of life.

The Wretchedness of our Life: --However much we rich people may
reform, however much we may bolster up this delusive life of ours
with the aid of our science and art, this life will become, with
every year, both weaker and more diseased; with every year the number
of suicides, and the refusals to bear children, will increase; with
every year we shall feel the growing sadness of our life; with every
generation, the new generations of people of this sphere of society
will become more puny.

It is obvious that in this path of the augmentation of the comforts
and the pleasures of life, in the path of every sort of cure, and of
artificial preparations for the improvements of the sight, the
hearing, the appetite, false teeth, false hair, respiration, massage,
and so on, there can be no salvation.  That people who do not make
use of these perfected preparations are stronger and healthier, has
become such a truism, that advertisements are printed in the
newspapers of stomach-powders for the wealthy, under the heading,
"Blessings for the poor," {1} in which it is stated that only the
poor are possessed of proper digestive powers, and that the rich
require assistance, and, among other various sorts of assistance,
these powders.  It is impossible to set the matter right by any
diversions, comforts, and powders, whatever; only a change of life
can rectify it.

The Inconsistency of our Life with our Conscience: --however we may
seek to justify our betrayal of humanity to ourselves, all our
justifications will crumble into dust in the presence of the
evidence.  All around us, people are dying of excessive labor and of
privation; we ruin the labor of others, the food and clothing which
are indispensable to them, merely with the object of procuring
diversion and variety for our wearisome lives.  And, therefore, the
conscience of a man of our circle, if even a spark of it be left in
him, cannot be lulled to sleep, and it poisons all these comforts and
those pleasures of life which our brethren, suffering and perishing
in their toil, procure for us.  But not only does every conscientious
man feel this himself,--he would be glad to forget it, but this he
cannot do.

The new, ephemeral justifications of science for science, of art for
art, do not exclude the light of a simple, healthy judgment.  The
conscience of man cannot be quieted by fresh devices; and it can only
be calmed by a change of life, for which and in which no
justification will be required.

Two causes prove to the people of the wealthy classes the necessity
for a change of life:  the requirements of their individual welfare,
and of the welfare of those most nearly connected with them, which
cannot be satisfied in the path in which they now stand; and the
necessity of satisfying the voice of conscience, the impossibility of
accomplishing which is obvious in their present course.  These
causes, taken together, should lead people of the wealthy classes to
alter their mode of life, to such a change as shall satisfy their
well-being and their conscience.

And there is only one such change possible:  they must cease to
deceive, they must repent, they must acknowledge that labor is not a
curse, but the glad business of life.  "But what will be the result
if I do toil for ten, or eight, or five hours at physical work, which
thousands of peasants will gladly perform for the money which I
possess?" people say to this.

The first, simplest, and indubitable result will be, that you will
become a more cheerful, a healthier, a more alert, and a better man,
and that you will learn to know the real life, from which you have
hidden yourself, or which has been hidden from you.

The second result will be, that, if you possess a conscience, it will
not only cease to suffer as it now suffers when it gazes upon the
toil of others, the significance of which we, through ignorance,
either always exaggerate or depreciate, but you will constantly
experience a glad consciousness that, with every day, you are doing
more and more to satisfy the demands of your conscience, and you will
escape from that fearful position of such an accumulation of evil
heaped upon your life that there exists no possibility of doing good
to people; you will experience the joy of living in freedom, with the
possibility of good; you will break a window,--an opening into the
domain of the moral world which has been closed to you.

"But this is absurd," people usually say to you, for people of our
sphere, with profound problems standing before us,--problems
philosophical, scientific, artistic, ecclesiastical and social.  It
would be absurd for us ministers, senators, academicians professors,
artists, a quarter of an hour of whose time is so prized by people,
to waste our time on any thing of that sort, would it not?--on the
cleaning of our boots, the washing of our shirts, in hoeing, in
planting potatoes, or in feeding our chickens and our cows, and so
on; in those things which are gladly done for us, not only by our
porter or our cook, but by thousands of people who value our time?

But why should we dress ourselves, wash and comb our hair? why should
we hand chairs to ladies, to guests? why should we open and shut
doors, hand ladies, into carriages, and do a hundred other things
which serfs formerly did for us?  Because we think that it is
necessary so to do; that human dignity demands it; that it is the
duty, the obligation, of man.

And the same is the case with physical labor.  The dignity of man,
his sacred duty and obligation, consists in using the hands and feet
which have been given to him, for that for which they were given to
him, and that which consumes food on the labor which produces that
food; and that they should be used, not on that which shall cause
them to pine away, not as objects to wash and clean, and merely for
the purpose of stuffing into one's mouth food, drink, and cigarettes.
This is the significance that physical labor possesses for man in
every community; but in our community, where the avoidance of this
law of labor has occasioned the unhappiness of a whole class of
people, employment in physical labor acquires still another
significance,--the significance of a sermon, and of an occupation
which removes a terrible misfortune that is threatening mankind.

To say that physical labor is an insignificant occupation for a man
of education, is equivalent to saying, in connection with the
erection of a temple:  "What does it matter whether one stone is laid
accurately in its place?"  Surely, it is precisely under conditions
of modesty, simplicity, and imperceptibleness, that every magnificent
thing is accomplished; it is impossible to plough, to build, to
pasture cattle, or even to think, amid glare, thunder, and
illumination.  Grand and genuine deeds are always simple and modest.
And such is the grandest of all deeds which we have to deal with,--
the reconciliation of those fearful contradictions amid which we are
living.  And the deeds which will reconcile these contradictions are
those modest, imperceptible, apparently ridiculous ones, the serving
one's self, physical labor for one's self, and, if possible, for
others also, which we rich people must do, if we understand the
wretchedness, the unscrupulousness, and the danger of the position
into which we have drifted.

What will be the result if I, or some other man, or a handful of men,
do not despise physical labor, but regard it as indispensable to our
happiness and to the appeasement of our conscience?  This will be the
result, that there will be one man, two men, or a handful of men,
who, coming into conflict with no one, without governmental or
revolutionary violence, will decide for ourselves the terrible
question which stands before all the world, and which sets people at
variance, and that we shall settle it in such wise that life will be
better to them, that their conscience will be more at peace, and that
they will have nothing to fear; the result will be, that other people
will see that the happiness which they are seeking everywhere, lies
there around them; that the apparently unreconcilable contradictions
of conscience and of the constitution of this world will be
reconciled in the easiest and most joyful manner; and that, instead
of fearing the people who surround us, it will become necessary for
us to draw near to them and to love them.

The apparently insoluble economical and social problem is merely the
problem of Kriloff's casket. {2}  The casket will simply open.  And
it will not open, so long as people do not do simply that first and
simple thing--open it.

A man sets up what he imagines to be his own peculiar library, his
own private picture-gallery, his own apartments and clothing, he
accumulates his own money in order therewith to purchase every thing
that he needs; and the end of it all is, that engaged with this
fancied property of his, as though it were real, he utterly loses his
sense of that which actually constitutes his property, on which he
can really labor, which can really serve him, and which will always
remain in his power, and of that which is not and cannot be his own
property, whatever he may call it, and which cannot serve as the
object of his occupation.

Words always possess a clear significance until we deliberately
attribute to them a false sense.

What does property signify?

Property signifies that which has been given to me, which belongs to
me exclusively; that with which I can always do any thing I like;
that which no one can take away from me; that which will remain mine
to the end of my life, and precisely that which I am bound to use,
increase, and improve.  Now, there exists but one such piece of
property for any man,--himself.

Hence it results that half a score of men may till the soil, hew
wood, and make shoes, not from necessity, but in consequence of an
acknowledgment of the fact that man should work, and that the more he
works the better it will be for him.  It results, that half a score
of men,--or even one man, may demonstrate to people, both by his
confession and by his actions, that the terrible evil from which they
are suffering is not a law of fate, the will of God, or any
historical necessity; but that it is merely a superstition, which is
not in the least powerful or terrible, but weak and insignificant, in
which we must simply cease to believe, as in idols, in order to rid
ourselves of it, and in order to rend it like a paltry spider's web.
Men who will labor to fulfil the glad law of their existence, that is
to say, those who work in order to fulfil the law of toil, will rid
themselves of that frightful superstition of property for themselves.

If the life of a man is filled with toil, and if he knows the
delights of rest, he requires no chambers, furniture, and rich and
varied clothing; he requires less costly food; he needs no means of
locomotion, or of diversion.  But the principal thing is, that the
man who regards labor as the business and the joy of his life will
not seek that relief from his labor which the labors of others might
afford him.  The man who regards life as a matter of labor will
propose to himself as his object, in proportion as he acquires
understanding, skill, and endurance, greater and greater toil, which
shall constantly fill his life to a greater and greater degree.  For
such a man, who sees the meaning of his life in work itself, and not
in its results, for the acquisition of property, there can be no
question as to the implements of labor.  Although such a man will
always select the most suitable implements, that man will receive the
same satisfaction from work and rest, when he employs the most
unsuitable implements.  If there be a steam-plough, he will use it;
if there is none, he will till the soil with a horse-plough, and, if
there is none, with a primitive curved bit of wood shod with iron, or
he will use a rake; and, under all conditions, he will equally attain
his object.  He will pass his life in work that is useful to men, and
he will therefore win complete satisfaction.

And the position of such a man, both in his external and internal
conditions, will be more happy than that of the man who devotes his
life to the acquisition of property.  Such a man will never suffer
need in his outward circumstances, because people, perceiving his
desire to work, will always try to provide him with the most
productive work, as they proportion a mill to the water-power.  And
they will render his material existence free from care, which they
will not do for people who are striving to acquire property.  And
freedom from anxiety in his material conditions is all that a man
needs.  Such a man will always be happier in his internal conditions,
than the one who seeks wealth, because the first will never gain that
which he is striving for, while the latter always will, in proportion
to his powers.  The feeble, the aged, the dying, according to the
proverb, "With the written absolution in his hands," will receive
full satisfaction, and the love and sympathy of men.

What, then, will be the outcome of a few eccentric individuals, or
madmen, tilling the soil, making shoes, and so on, instead of smoking
cigarettes, playing whist, and roaming about everywhere to relieve
their tedium, during the space of the ten leisure hours a day which
every intellectual worker enjoys?  This will be the outcome:  that
these madmen will show in action, that that imaginary property for
which men suffer, and for which they torment themselves and others,
is not necessary for happiness; that it is oppressive, and that it is
mere superstition; that property, true property, consists only in
one's own head and hands; and that, in order to actually exploit this
real property with profit and pleasure, it is necessary to reject the
false conception of property outside one's own body, upon which we
expend the best efforts of our lives.  The outcome us, that these men
will show, that only when a man ceases to believe in imaginary
property, only when he brings into play his real property, his
capacities, his body, so that they will yield him fruit a hundred-
fold, and happiness of which we have no idea,--only then will he be
so strong, useful, and good a man, that, wherever you may fling him,
he will always land on his feet; that he will everywhere and always
be a brother to everybody; that he will be intelligible to everybody,
and necessary, and good.  And men looking on one, on ten such madmen,
will understand what they must all do in order to loose that terrible
knot in which the superstition regarding property has entangled them,
in order to free themselves from the unfortunate position in which
they are all now groaning with one voice, not knowing whence to find
an issue from it.

But what can one man do amid a throng which does not agree with him?
There is no argument which could more clearly demonstrate the terror
of those who make use of it than this.  The burlaki {3} drag their
bark against the current.  There cannot be found a burlak so stupid
that he will refuse to pull away at his towing-rope because he alone
is not able to drag the bark against the current.  He who, in
addition to his rights to an animal life, to eat and sleep,
recognizes any sort of human obligation, knows very well in what that
human obligation lies, just as the boatman knows it when the tow-rope
is attached to him.  The boatman knows very well that all he has to
do is to pull at the rope, and proceed in the given direction.  He
will seek what he is to do, and how he is to do it, only when the
tow-rope is removed from him.  And as it is with these boatmen and
with all people who perform ordinary work, so it is with the affairs
of all humanity.  All that each man needs is not to remove the tow-
rope, but to pull away on it in the direction which his master
orders.  And, for this purpose, one sort of reason is bestowed on all
men, in order that the direction may be always the same.  And this
direction has obviously been so plainly indicated, that both in the
life of all the people about us, and in the conscience of each
individual man, only he who does not wish to work can say that he
does not see it.  Then, what is the outcome of this?

This:  that one, perhaps two men, will pull; a third will look on,
and will join them; and in this manner the best people will unite
until the affair begins to start, and make progress, as though itself
inspiring and bidding thereto even those who do not understand what
is being done, and why it is being done.  First, to the contingent of
men who are consciously laboring in order to comply with the law of
God, there will be added the people who only half understand and who
only half confess the faith; then a still greater number of people
who admit the same doctrine will join them, merely on the faith of
the originators; and finally the majority of mankind will recognize
this, and then it will come to pass, that men will cease to ruin
themselves, and will find happiness.

This will happen,--and it will be very speedily,--when people of our
set, and after them a vast majority, shall cease to think it
disgraceful to pay visits in untanned boots, and not disgraceful to
walk in overshoes past people who have no shoes at all; that it is
disgraceful not to understand French, and not disgraceful to eat
bread and not to know how to set it; that it is disgraceful not to
have a starched shirt and clean clothes, and not disgraceful to go
about in clean garments thereby showing one's idleness; that it is
disgraceful to have dirty hands, and not disgraceful not to have
hands with callouses.

All this will come to pass when the sense of the community shall
demand it.  But the sense of the community will demand this when
those delusions in the imagination of men, which have concealed the
truth from them, shall have been abolished.  Within my own
recollection, great changes have taken place in this respect.  And
these changes have taken place only because the general opinion has
undergone an alteration.  Within my memory, it has come to pass, that
whereas it used to be disgraceful for wealthy people not to drive out
with four horses and two footmen, and not to keep a valet or a maid
to dress them, wash them, put on their shoes, and so forth; it has
now suddenly become discreditable for one not to put on one's own
clothes and shoes for one's self, and to drive with footmen.  Public
opinion has effected all these changes.  Are not the changes which
public opinion is now preparing clear?

All that was necessary five and twenty years ago was to abolish the
delusion which justified the right of serfdom, and public opinion as
to what was praiseworthy and what was discreditable changed, and life
changed also.  All that is now requisite is to annihilate the
delusion which justifies the power of money over men, and public
opinion will undergo a change as to what is creditable and what is
disgraceful, and life will be changed also; and the annihilation of
the delusion, of the justification of the moneyed power, and the
change in public opinion in this respect, will be promptly
accomplished.  This delusion is already flickering, and the truth
will very shortly be disclosed.  All that is required is to gaze
steadfastly, in order to perceive clearly that change in public
opinion which has already taken place, and which is simply not
recognized, not fitted with a word.  The educated man of our day has
but to reflect ever so little on what will be the outcome of those
views of the world which he professes, in order to convince himself
that the estimate of good and bad, by which, by virtue of his
inertia, he is guided in life, directly contradict his views of the
world.

All that the man of our century has to do is to break away for a
moment from the life which runs on by force of inertia, to survey it
from the one side, and subject it to that same standard which arises
from his whole view of the world, in order to be horrified at the
definition of his whole life, which follows from his views of the
world.  Let us take, for instance, a young man (the energy of life is
greater in the young, and self-consciousness is more obscured).  Let
us take, for instance, a young man belonging to the wealthy classes,
whatever his tendencies may chance to be.

Every good young man considers it disgraceful not to help an old man,
a child, or a woman; he thinks, in a general way, that it is a shame
to subject the life or health of another person to danger, or to shun
it himself.  Every one considers that shameful and brutal which
Schuyler relates of the Kirghiz in times of tempest,--to send out the
women and the aged females to hold fast the corners of the kibitka
[tent] during the storm, while they themselves continue to sit within
the tent, over their kumis [fermented mare's-milk].  Every one thinks
it shameful to make a week man work for one; that it is still more
disgraceful in time of danger--on a burning ship, for example,--being
strong, to be the first to seat one's self in the lifeboat,--to
thrust aside the weak and leave them in danger, and so on.

All men regard this as disgraceful, and would not do it upon any
account, in certain exceptional circumstances; but in every-day life,
the very same actions, and others still worse, are concealed from
them by delusions, and they perpetrate them incessantly.  The
establishment of this new view of life is the business of public
opinion.  Public opinion, supporting such a view, will speedily be
formed.

Women form public opinion, and women are especially powerful in our
day.



TO WOMEN.



As stated in the Bible, a law was given to the man and the woman,--to
the man, the law of labor; to the woman, the law of bearing children.
Although we, with our science, avons change tout ca, the law for the
man, as for woman, remains as unalterable as the liver in its place,
and departure from it is equally punished with inevitable death.  The
only difference lies in this, that departure from the law, in the
case of the man, is punished so immediately in the future, that it
may be designated as present punishment; but departure from the law,
in the case of the woman, receives its chastisement in a more distant
future.

The general departure of all men from the law exterminates people
immediately; the departure from it of all women annihilates it in the
succeeding generation.  But the evasion by some men and some women
does not exterminate the human race, and only deprives those who
evade it of the rational nature of man. The departure of men from
this law began long ago, among those classes who were in a position
to subject others, and, constantly spreading, it has continued down
to our own times; and in our own day it has reached folly, the ideal
consisting in evasion of the law,--the ideal expressed by Prince
Blokhin, and shared in by Renan and by the whole cultivated world:
"Machines will work, and people will be bundles of nerves devoted to
enjoyment."

There was hardly any departure from the law in the part of women, it
was expressed only in prostitution, and in the refusal to bear
children--in private cases.  The women belonging to the wealthy
classes fulfilled their law, while the men did not comply with
theirs; and therefore the women became stronger, and continued to
rule, and must rule, over men who have evaded the law, and who have,
therefore, lost their senses.  It is generally stated that woman (the
woman of Paris in particular is childless) has become so bewitching,
through making use of all the means of civilization, that she has
gained the upper hand over man by this fascination of hers.  This is
not only unjust, but precisely the reverse of the truth.  It is not
the childless woman who has conquered man, but the mother, that woman
who has fulfilled her law, while the man has not fulfilled his.  That
woman who deliberately remains childless, and who entrances man with
her shoulders and her locks, is not the woman who rules over men, but
the one who has been corrupted by man, who has descended to his
level,--to the level of the vicious man,--who has evaded the law
equally with himself, and who has lost, in company with him, every
rational idea of life.

From this error springs that remarkable piece of stupidity which is
called the rights of women.  The formula of these rights of women is
as follows:  "Here! you man," says the woman, "you have departed from
your law of real labor, and you want us to bear the burden of our
real labor.  No, if this is to be so, we understand, as well as you
do, how to perform those semblances of labor which you exercise in
banks, ministries, universities, and academies; we desire, like
yourselves, under the pretext of the division of labor, to make use
of the labor of others, and to live for the gratification of our
caprices alone."  They say this, and prove by their action that they
understand no worse, if not better, than men, how to exercise this
semblance of labor.

This so-called woman question has come up, and could only come up,
among men who have departed from the law of actual labor.  All that
is required is, to return to that, and this question cannot exist.
Woman, having her own inevitable task, will never demand the right to
share the toil of men in the mines and in the fields.  She could only
demand to share in the fictitious labors of the men of the wealthy
classes.

The woman of our circle has been, and still is, stronger than the
man, not by virtue of her fascinations, not through her cleverness in
performing the same pharisaical semblance of work as man, but because
she has not stepped out from under the law that she should undergo
that real labor, with danger to her life, with exertion to the last
degree, from which the man of the wealthy classes has excused
herself.

But, within my memory, a departure from this law on the part of
woman, that is to say, her fall, has begun; and, within my memory, it
has become more and more the case.  Woman, having lost the law, has
acquired the belief that her strength lies in the witchery of her
charms, or in her skill in pharisaical pretences at intellectual
work.  And both things are bad for the children.  And, within my
memory, women of the wealthy classes have come to refuse to bear
children.  And so mothers who hold the power in their hands let it
escape them, in order to make way for the dissolute women, and to put
themselves on a level with them.  The evil is already wide-spread,
and is extending farther and farther every day; and soon it will lay
hold on all the women of the wealthy classes, and then they will
compare themselves with men:  and in company with them, they will
lose the rational meaning of life.  But there is still time.

If women would but comprehend their destiny, their power, and use it
for the salvation of their husbands, brothers, and children,--for the
salvation of all men!

Women of the wealthy classes who are mothers, the salvation of the
men of our world from the evils from which they are suffering, lies
in your hands.

Not those women who are occupied with their dainty figures, with
their bustles, their hair-dressing, and their attraction for men, and
who bear children against their will, with despair, and hand them
over to nurses; nor those who attend various courses of lectures, and
discourse of psychometric centres and differentiation, and who also
endeavor to escape bearing children, in order that it may not
interfere with their folly which they call culture:  but those women
and mothers, who, possessing the power to refuse to bear children,
consciously and in a straightforward way submit to this eternal,
unchangeable law, knowing that the burden and the difficulty of such
submission is their appointed lot in life,--these are the women and
mothers of our wealthy classes, in whose hands, more than in those of
any one else, lies the salvation of the men of our sphere in society
from the miseries that oppress them.

Ye women and mothers who deliberately submit yourselves to the law of
God, you alone in our wretched, deformed circle, which has lost the
semblance of humanity, you alone know the whole of the real meaning
of life, according to the law of God; and you alone, by your example,
can demonstrate to people that happiness in life, in submission to
the will of God, of which they are depriving themselves.  You alone
know those raptures and those joys which invade the whole being, that
bliss which is appointed for the man who does not depart from the law
of God.  You know the happiness of love for your husbands,--a
happiness which does not come to an end, which does not break off
short, like all other forms of happiness, and which constitutes the
beginning of a new happiness,--of love for your child.  You alone,
when you are simple and obedient to the will of God, know not that
farcical pretence of labor which the men of our circle call work, and
know that the labor imposed by God on men, and know its true rewards,
the bliss which it confers.  You know this, when, after the raptures
of love, you await with emotion, fear, and terror that torturing
state of pregnancy which renders you ailing for nine months, which
brings you to the verge of death, and to intolerable suffering and
pain.  You know the conditions of true labor, when, with joy, you
await the approach and the increase of the most terrible torture,
after which to you alone comes the bliss which you well know.  You
know this, when, immediately after this torture, without respite,
without a break, you undertake another series of toils and
sufferings,--nursing,--in which process you at one and the same time
deny yourselves, and subdue to your feelings the very strongest human
need, that of sleep, which, as the proverb says, is dearer than
father or mother; and for months and years you never get a single
sound, unbroken might's rest, and sometimes, nay, often, you do not
sleep at all for a period of several nights in succession, but with
failing arms you walk alone, punishing the sick child who is breaking
your heart.  And when you do all this, applauded by no one, and
expecting no praises for it from any one, nor any reward,--when you
do this, not as an heroic deed, but like the laborer in the Gospel
when he came from the field, considering that you have done only that
which was your duty, then you know what the false, pretentious labor
of men performed for glory really is, and that true labor is
fulfilling the will of God, whose command you feel in your heart.
You know that if you are a true mother it makes no difference that no
one has seen your toil, that no one has praised you for it, but that
it has only been looked upon as what must needs be so, and that even
those for whom your have labored not only do not thank you, but often
torture and reproach you.  And with the next child you do the same:
again you suffer, again you undergo the fearful, invisible labor; and
again you expect no reward from any one, and yet you feel the sane
satisfaction.

If you are like this, you will not say after two children, or after
twenty, that you have done enough, just as the laboring man fifty
years of age will not say that he has worked enough, while he still
continues to eat and to sleep, and while his muscles still demand
work; if you are like this, your will not cast the task of nursing
and care-taking upon some other mother, just as a laboring man will
not give another man the work which he has begun, and almost
completed, to finish:  because into this work you will throw your
life.  And therefore the more there is of this work, the fuller and
the happier is your life.

And when you are like this, for the good fortune of men, you will
apply that law of fulfilling God's will, by which you guide your
life, to the lives of your husband, of your children, and of those
most nearly connected with you.  If your are like this, and know from
your own experience, that only self-sacrificing, unseen, unrewarded
labor, accompanied with danger to life and to the extreme bounds of
endurance, for the lives of others, is the appointed lot of man,
which affords him satisfaction, then you will announce these demands
to others; you will urge your husband to the same toil; and you will
measure and value the dignity of men acceding to this toil; and for
this toil you will also prepare your children.

Only that mother who looks upon children as a disagreeable accident,
and upon love, the comforts of life, costume, and society, as the
object of life, will rear her children in such a manner that they
shall have as much enjoyment as possible out of life, and that they
shall make the greatest possible use of it; only she will feed them
luxuriously, deck them out, amuse them artificially; only she will
teach them, not that which will fit them for self-sacrificing
masculine or feminine labor with danger of their lives, and to the
last limits of endurance, but that which will deliver them from this
labor.  Only such a woman, who has lost the meaning of her life, will
sympathize with that delusive and false male labor, by means of which
her husband, having rid himself of the obligations of a man, is
enabled to enjoy, in her company, the work of others.  Only such a
woman will choose a similar man for the husband of her daughter, and
will estimate men, not by what they are personally, but by that which
is connected with them,--position, money, or their ability to take
advantage of the labor of others.

But the true mother, who actually knows the will of God, will fit her
children to fulfil it also.  For such a mother, to see her child
overfed, enervated, decked out, will mean suffering; for all this, as
she well knows, will render difficult for him the fulfilment of the
law of God in which she has instructed him.  Such a mother will
teach, not that which will enable her son and her daughter to rid
themselves of labor, but that which will help them to endure the
toils of life.  She will have no need to inquire what she shall teach
her children, for what she shall prepare them.  Such a woman will not
only not encourage her husband to false and delusive labor, which has
but one object, that of using the labors of others; but she will bear
herself with disgust and horror towards such an employment, which
serves as a double temptation to her children.  Such a woman will not
choose a husband for her daughter on account of the whiteness of his
hands and the refinement of manner; but, well aware that labor and
deceit will exist always and everywhere, she will, beginning with her
husband, respect and value in men, and will require from them, real
labor, with expenditure and risk of life, and she will despise that
deceptive labor which has for its object the ridding one's self of
all true toil.

Such a mother, who brings forth children and nurses them, and will
herself, rather than any other, feed her offspring and prepare their
food, and sew, and wash, and teach her children, and sleep and talk
with them, because in this she grounds the business of her life,--
only such a mother will not seek for her children external guaranties
in the form of her husband's money, and the children's diplomas; but
she will rear them to that same capacity for the self-sacrificing
fulfilment of the will of God which she is conscious of herself
possessing,--a capacity for enduring toil with expenditure and risk
of life,--because she knows that in this lies the sole guaranty, and
the only well-being in life.  Such a mother will not ask other people
what she ought to do; she will know every thing, and will fear
nothing.

If there can exist any doubt for the man and for the childless woman,
as to the path in which the fulfilment of the will of God lies, this
path is firmly and clearly defined for the woman who is a mother; and
if she has complied with it in submissiveness and in simplicity of
spirit, she, standing on that loftiest height of bliss which the
human being is permitted to attain, will become a guiding-star for
all men who are seeking good.  Only the mother can calmly say before
her death, to Him who sent her into this world, and to Him whom she
has served by bearing and rearing children more dear than herself,--
only she can say calmly, having served Him who has imposed this
service upon her:  "Now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace."
And this is the highest perfection, towards which, as towards the
highest bliss, men are striving.

Such are the women, who, having fulfilled their destiny, reign over
powerful men; such are the women who prepare the new generations of
people, and fix public opinion:  and, therefore, in the hands of
these women lies the highest power of saving men from the prevailing
and threatening evils of our times.

Yes, ye women and mothers, in your hands, more than in those of all
others, lies the salvation of the world!



Footnotes:

{1}  In English in the text.

{2}  An excellent translation of Kriloff's Fables, by Mr. W. R. S.
Ralston, is published in London.

{3}  Burlak, pl. burlaki, is a boatman on the River Volga.





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of What to do? by Leo Tolstoy/Tolstoi

